Stefan suwelack/scalable data inspection (#1586)
huggingface/blog: scalable-data-inspection.md

---
title: "Interactively explore your Huggingface dataset with one line of code"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/scalable-data-inspection/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: sps44
  guest: true
- user: druzsan
  guest: true
- user: neindochoh
  guest: true
- user: MarkusStoll
  guest: true
---

# Interactively explore your Huggingface dataset with one line of code

> The Huggingface *dataset* library not only provides access to more than 60k publicly available datasets, but also offers very convenient data preparation pipelines for custom datasets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Hugging Face [*datasets* library](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/index) not only provides access to more than 60k publicly available datasets, but also offers very convenient data preparation pipelines for custom datasets.
```

Reviewer 2: it's growing fast

```suggestion
The Hugging Face [*datasets* library](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/index) not only provides access to more than 70k publicly available datasets, but also offers very convenient data preparation pipelines for custom datasets.
```

> [Renumics Spotlight](https://github.com/Renumics/spotlight) allows you to create **interactive visualizations** to **identify critical clusters** in your data. Because Spotlight understands the data semantics within Huggingface datasets, you can **[get started with just one line of code](https://renumics.com/docs)**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Renumics Spotlight](https://github.com/Renumics/spotlight) allows you to create **interactive visualizations** to **identify critical clusters** in your data. Because Spotlight understands the data semantics within Hugging Face datasets, you can **[get started with just one line of code](https://renumics.com/docs)**:
```

```python
import datasets
from renumics import spotlight

ds = datasets.load_dataset('speech_commands', 'v0.01', split='validation')

spotlight.show(ds)
```

<figure class="image text-center">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/scalable-data-inspection/speech_commands_vis.gif" alt="Exploring the speech commands dataset with Spotlight.">
</figure> 

Spotlight allows to **leverage model results** such as predictions and embeddings to gain a deeper understanding in data segments and model failure modes:

```python
ds_results = datasets.load_dataset('renumics/speech_commands-ast-finetuned-results', 'v0.01', split='validation')
ds = datasets.concatenate_datasets([ds, ds_results], axis=1)

spotlight.show(ds, dtype={'embedding': spotlight.Embedding}, layout=spotlight.layouts.debug_classification(embedding='embedding', inspect={'audio': spotlight.dtypes.audio_dtype}))
```

Data inspection is a very important task in almost all ML development stages, but it can also be very time consuming.

> “Manual inspection of data has probably the highest value-to-prestige ratio of any activity in machine learning.” — Greg Brockman
> 

> [Spotlight](https://renumics.com/docs) helps you to **make data inspection more scalable** along two dimensions: Setting up and maintaining custom data inspection workflows and finding relevant data samples and clusters to inspect. In the following sections we show some examples based on Huggingface datasets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Spotlight](https://renumics.com/docs) helps you to **make data inspection more scalable** along two dimensions: Setting up and maintaining custom data inspection workflows and finding relevant data samples and clusters to inspect. In the following sections we show some examples based on Hugging Face datasets.
```

> ## Spotlight 🤝 Huggingface datasets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Spotlight 🤝 Hugging Face datasets
```

```python
ds = datasets.load_dataset('cifar100', split='test')
spotlight.show(ds)
```

In cases where the data types are ambiguous or not specified, the Spotlight API allows to manually assign them:

```python
label_mapping = dict(zip(ds.features['fine_label'].names, range(len(ds.features['fine_label'].names))))
spotlight.show(ds, dtype={'img': spotlight.Image, 'fine_label': spotlight.dtypes.CategoryDType(categories=label_mapping)})
```

## **Leveraging model results for data inspection**

Exploring raw unstructured datasets often yield little insights. Leveraging model results such as predictions or embeddings can help to uncover critical data samples and clusters. Spotlight has several visualization options (e.g. similarity map, confusion matrix) that specifically make use of model results.

> We recommend storing your prediction results directly in a Huggingface dataset. This not only allows you to take advantage of the batch processing capabilities of the datasets library, but also keeps label mappings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend storing your prediction results directly in a Hugging Face dataset. This not only allows you to take advantage of the batch processing capabilities of the datasets library, but also keeps label mappings.
```

> We can use the *transformers* library to compute embeddings and predictions on the CIFAR-100 image classification problem. We install the libraries via pip:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can use the [*transformers* library](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers) to compute embeddings and predictions on the CIFAR-100 image classification problem. We install the libraries via pip:
```

```bash

> pip install renumics-spotlight datasets transfomers[torch]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pip install renumics-spotlight datasets transformers[torch]
```

spotlight.show(ds_enriched, dtype={'embedding': spotlight.Embedding}, layout=layout)
```

<figure class="image text-center">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/scalable-data-inspection/cifar-100-model-debugging.png" alt="CIFAR-100 model debugging layout example.">
</figure> 

## Customizing data inspection workflows

Visualization layouts can be interactively changed, saved and loaded in the GUI: You can select different widget types and configurations. The *Inspector* widget allows to represent multimodal data samples including text, image, audio, video and time series data.

You can also define layouts through the [Python API](https://renumics.com/api/spotlight/). This option is especially useful for building custom data inspection and curation workflows including EDA, model debugging and model monitoring tasks.

In combination with the data issues widget, the Python API offers a great way to integrate the results of existing scripts (e.g. data quality checks or model monitoring) into a scalable data inspection workflow.

> ## Using Spotlight on the Huggingface hub

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Using Spotlight on the Hugging Face hub
```

> You can use Spotlight directly on your local NLP, audio, CV or multimodal dataset. If you would like to showcase your dataset or model results on the Huggingface hub, you can use Huggingface spaces to launch a Spotlight visualization for it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use Spotlight directly on your local NLP, audio, CV or multimodal dataset. If you would like to showcase your dataset or model results on the Hugging Face hub, you can use Hugging Face spaces to launch a Spotlight visualization for it.
```

> We have already prepared [example spaces](https://huggingface.co/renumics) for many popular NLP, audio and CV datasets on the hub. You can simply duplicate one of these spaces and specify your dataset in the HF_DATASET variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have already prepared [example spaces](https://huggingface.co/renumics) for many popular NLP, audio and CV datasets on the hub. You can simply duplicate one of these spaces and specify your dataset in the `HF_DATASET` variable.
```

You can optionally choose a dataset that contains model results and other configuration options such as splits, subsets or dataset revisions.

<figure class="image text-center">

>   <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/scalable-data-inspection/space_duplication_annotated.png" alt="Creating a new dataset visualization with Spotlight by duplicating a Huggingface space.">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/scalable-data-inspection/space_duplication_annotated.png" alt="Creating a new dataset visualization with Spotlight by duplicating a Hugging Face space.">
```

</figure> 

## What’s next?

> With Spotlight you can create **interactive visualizations** and leverage data enrichments to **identify critical clusters** in your Huggingface datasets. In this blog, we have seen both an audio ML and a computer vision example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Spotlight you can create **interactive visualizations** and leverage data enrichments to **identify critical clusters** in your Hugging Face datasets. In this blog, we have seen both an audio ML and a computer vision example.
```
